📄 Candidate-Job Recommendation System Documentation
1. Introduction

This project is an AI-powered recommendation system that matches job descriptions with candidate resumes. 
It leverages LLMs for structured information extraction and vector similarity search for efficient candidate ranking.

The goal is to help recruiters quickly identify the top candidates for a given role, based on skills and experience extracted automatically from text data.

2. System Architecture
🔹 Flow
 Job Description (JD)                   Candidate Resumes
          │                                      │
          ▼                                      │
   JD Extraction (LLM)                           │
          │                                      │
          └───────────► Embeddings ◄─────────────┘
                          │
                    Vector Database
                          │
                          ▼
                 Candidate-Job Matching
                          │
                          ▼
                 Ranked Candidate List

🔹 Components

Job Description Extraction

Input: Raw job description text.

Output: Structured JSON (skills, experience, role, etc.).

Embedding & Storage

Converts extracted fields into numerical embeddings.

similarity search.

Candidate-Job Matching

Computes similarity score between JD and candidate profile embeddings.

Ranks candidates by relevance.

3. Workflow
Example Flow

Recruiter uploads a job description.

System extracts:

{
  "Role": "Data Engineer",
  "Skills": ["Python", "SQL", "Airflow", "ETL", "BigQuery"],
  "Experience": "3+ years"
}


Data from candidate resumes.
Example candidate output:

{
  "Name": "Alice Johnson",
  "Skills": ["Python", "Pandas", "SQL", "ETL"],
  "Experience": "4 years",
  "Education": "B.Tech in Computer Science"
}


Both are embedded into vectors.

Returning top N candidates sorted by similarity score.

Final output:
Example
Candidate Ranking for Data Engineer:
1. Alice Johnson - Score: 0.83
2. Ravi Sharma - Score: 0.76
3. Maria Lopez - Score: 0.71

4. Tech Stack

Python - Core programming language.

LLMs (Gemini) - Information extraction.

FAISS - Vector similarity search.

pandas/numpy - Data handling.

Flask/Streamlit/FastAPI (optional) - Web interface.

5. Usage

In terminal, set up environment and install dependencies:

then run the following commands to start the application:
Web App:
streamlit run app.py


Then the app will be opened in browser.

Enter the JD in the text area and click on "Find Candidates".

6. Limitations

Extraction accuracy depends on LLM quality.

Matching is purely semantic similarity (no learning-to-rank yet).

Limited handling of domain-specific terminology.

7. Future Enhancements

We envision the system evolving in stages, with each stage combining multiple improvements.

Stage 1 - Advanced Extraction & Resume Handling

Improve LLM extraction to capture:

Hard skills (e.g., Python, SQL, ETL).

Soft skills (e.g., teamwork, leadership).

Personality traits from resumes/JDs.

Add support for multiple input formats: PDF, DOCX, LinkedIn profiles.

👉 Combination: Stronger extraction + multi-format support = broader candidate coverage.

Stage 2 - Scalable Storage & Search

Replace FAISS with a cloud-native vector database (e.g., Pinecone, Weaviate).

Enable real-time candidate lookup at scale.

👉 Combination: Advanced extraction (Stage 1) + scalable vector DB (Stage 2) = production-ready matching engine.

Stage 3 - Learning-to-Rank Model

Train a supervised ML ranking model on historical hiring data.

Use features like:

JD-Candidate similarity.

Candidate experience level.

Recruiter feedback.

👉 Combination: Vector DB (Stage 2) + learning-to-rank = personalized candidate recommendations.

Stage 4 - Recruiter Dashboard & Feedback Loop

Web-based dashboard to:

Upload JDs and resumes.

View candidate matches.

Apply filters (location, experience, education).

Feedback mechanism: Recruiters label matches as Good/Bad.

System retrains periodically using feedback.

👉 Combination: ML ranking (Stage 3) + recruiter feedback = continuous improvement system.

Stage 5 - ATS Integration & Enterprise Features

Integrate with Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS).

Role-based access for recruiters, managers, and HR admins.

Analytics dashboard:

Hiring funnel.

Candidate diversity metrics.

Time-to-hire statistics.

👉 Combination: Dashboard (Stage 4) + ATS integration = end-to-end hiring solution.

8. Conclusion

This system demonstrates the potential of combining LLMs with vector search for recruitment. 
While still a prototype, it can be extended into a full-fledged AI recruitment assistant with the planned enhancements.